Thai nurses and doctors check temperatures of travelers coming from Hong Kong
at the Bangkok International Airport in April 2003, during the SARS outbreak.
Reporter Caroline Chen lived through SARS, and she covered Ebola, Zika and,
now, coronavirus. (Paula Bronstein/Getty Images) Series: Coronavirus

Is the United States Prepared for COVID-19?

ProPublica is a nonprofit newsroom that investigates abuses of power. Sign up
to receive our biggest stories as soon as they’re published.

I grew up in Hong Kong and was 13 when SARS swept through the city, infecting
about 1,750 people and killing nearly 300. As a teenager, the hardest part
was being stuck at home and missing my friends. I only started to pay
attention to the daily death toll after my parents decided that’s what would
dictate when I could go back to school. But the experience shaped me. I
picked up personal hygiene habits, like pressing elevator buttons with my
knuckles. And I developed a deep respect for front-line medical workers, many
of whom labored around the clock until they, too, succumbed.

That was only my first experience with an outbreak.

In 2014, I was a rookie reporter on the Bloomberg News health desk helping to
cover the growing Ebola crisis in West Africa when we got word that the U.S.
had its first diagnosed patient. My editor looked down his row of reporters
and his eyes fell on me, the one with no familial obligations. “Hey
Caroline,” he said, “want to go to Dallas today?” The experience gave me a
deeper look into how governments and scientists grapple with a fast-moving,
deadly target. I learned about contact tracing as I tagged along with CDC
disease detectives. A colleague and I delved deep into how the government’s
cumbersome contracting process delayed the development of a possible
treatment for Ebola. I later covered Zika, reporting on Florida’s lonely
fight against the virus, as Congress gave the state little assistance.

Get Our Top Investigations

Subscribe to the Big Story newsletter. Email address This site is protected
by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply.

Every time, I’ve seen the same gaps emerge in the public’s understanding of
what’s really happening. On one side, I have epidemiologists and lab
directors explaining to me, in excruciating detail, nuanced models and
technicalities, like how PCR assays work. On the other side, I see
oversimplified headlines and misleading statistics touted by government
officials.

Now I’m on ProPublica’s coronavirus reporting team, speaking to dozens of
sources every day, from epidemiology experts and worried medical workers to
members of the public, who are not sure what to take from the headlines
they’re seeing. ProPublica specializes in accountability journalism, and our
goal is to find out what’s happening and let the public know of any
shortfalls in emergency response.

Get Involved We Want to Talk to People Working or Living on the Front Lines
of Coronavirus. Help Us Report.

Are you a public health worker, medical provider, elected official, patient
or other COVID-19 expert? We’re looking for information and sources. Help
make sure our journalism is responsible and focused on the right issues.

Here’s what you need to know: Testing Is Still Limited

On Tuesday, after days of growing clamor to make more testing available, Vice
President Mike Pence announced that the administration was issuing new
guidance that “will make it clear that any American can be tested” for
COVID-19, the disease caused by the virus, and said that 2,500 kits would be
sent out this week, an equivalent of 1.5 million tests.

Lifting restrictions on testing criteria is a much-needed step, but if your
takeaway was that hundreds of thousands of Americans will be able to walk
into doctors’ offices by Friday and immediately get tested, you’d be wrong.

It doesn’t matter if boxes upon boxes of kits are available if labs are
struggling to set up the tests or are short on staff to run them. At the end
of the day, what I want to know (and I imagine, what everyone wants to know)
is how many people can be tested. That’s the unit that I am pressing public
health officials and lab directors for when I interview them.

Here are some basics that may be useful to keep in mind: The CDC test kits
can be thought of somewhat like a Blue Apron meal kit; there’s some assembly
required before a lab can begin testing. It’s not like a protein bar, ready
to eat straight out of the wrapper.